Unknown Speaker  35:14  
Okay, so one is a David and I wrote a paper on something we're calling the rise analysis. Rise analysis is a way to continuously improve your resources using data. And the way you do it is you just group all of your assessment items to an outcome, and group all of your pages to an outcome. And then you just do content engagement or pageviews, by assessment scores on items, and you get like this Cartesian grid, and you have like higher than the mean, lower than the mean in both directions. Then you could imagine each quadrant is something different, like high use high grades is like successful, like that's what we want everything to be students are using the content and they're doing well. Low use and low grades is like, oh, what's going on? are students overwhelmed? Are they too busy? Are they confused about the requirements for the task? The low use high grade is like, students didn't even have to try. Like they had high prior knowledge. They didn't have to go in and use the resources because they already knew it. And then the magical quadrant is high use low grade, students are in the content. They're trying to figure it out. And still doing poorly. Those are the learning outcomes we need to target to improve student learning. Yeah, yeah. And it's so so simple, almost boringly simple.

Unknown Speaker  36:46  
Yeah. And so I think Michael Feldstein if you know, him, kind of an edtech. blogger, called it like, almost boring, like, almost too simple to the point that it's boring. But that was like a compliment, like, no one has no one talks about doing continuous improvement work like this. But that's one of the things we're doing at Lumen that is so simple, that you think it's not going to be helpful. But I mean, we're regularly every semester identifying new outcomes, we should target in our courses, and using that data to help us improve learning outcomes for teachers and students.

Jordan
Industry: Research Scientist


Unknown Speaker  38:35  
Yeah, I'm just gonna give you one more example. Okay, so there is a, okay, so it's about dashboards in general, dashboards, you know, pretty charts and graphs showing data really, really cool. Everyone wants one, everyone likes them. But my hypothesis is, little action happens, because you looked at a dashboard. For example, in marketing, you're always striving for like this call to action. Like, okay, you come to my website, I really want you to buy something, here's the call to action. It's big, it's blue, it's right in the middle of my site, I maybe put it in, there are five places, if you go into a dashboard, you don't see a call to action anywhere. It's like, Hey, here's your data, you know, get in there. And I think the term is sense making and awareness, like get in there and figure things out. And so my hypothesis is that very little action comes from these sorts of dashboards because of the literacies required to interpret them. First, you have to have like graph literacy, like what is a graph? What does data look like in a graph? How does it work? Like, how do I interpret it? Then there's like the data literacy of what is the data? How is it collected? What does it mean? And then in educational context, I would say there's an instructional design literacy of what does effective educational practice look like? What should my data look like? How is it different than what it looks like? And what should I do, because of what I've seen. And I think that process is really, really hard to get someone through. And so the the flip side of it is, rather than a dashboard, what about like a data driven to do list, I might call it like an action dashboard. And so it makes all of those decisions for you. And then it just tells you what to do, basically. So it looks at all the data, you know, applies the right rules, and then tells you exactly what you should do based on the data. So a good example of this is one of my side gigs. Right now I'm building an action dashboard for an online High School in Utah. And the action dashboard just groups students based on if then rules. So if the student has spent a lot of time in the course, and is still failing, then they're in the trying but struggling group. And at any given time, a teacher can log in and say, Who am I trying with struggling students, there they are, there's the 10 students, click a button to email them and will pre populate with the template. And it's that simple. There's another group inactive in my course, the past seven days, this is obviously a problem like the student is not even logging in. And it's just right there. Like here are the 12 students that haven't logged in, in the past seven days. And if you think about this, like there's nothing fancy, from a technology perspective, it's almost boringly simple. And yet, as we've been talking to teachers about it, they love it so much. Like, they just want to know like, Okay, tell me what I need to do based on the data. And it's exactly what they need. Like, I think our time to action is going to be like 10 seconds. So from when a teacher logs in until when they act for the first time based on data is probably 10 seconds. were generally dashboard, it's probably like, I don't know, 30 minutes, 20 minutes, 10 minutes if, if they ever make it to an action?


These findings also echo past research that highlighted how EDS requires individuals to bring together technical skills applied with an understanding of specific, complex, and changing educational contexts (Staudt Willet & Rosenberg, 2023). Similarly, Agasisti and Bowers (2017) argued that the work of an educational data scientist would be “extremely delicate because it simultaneously necessitates the technical capacity for sophisticated data analysis and the sensibility for the specificities of the educational field” (p. 198). Such delicacy in the intersection of data science and education may be rooted in the messiness from both directions. On the data side, there are unclear boundaries among the tasks of data collection, management, analysis, and communication that are conducted upon request. On the education side, learning is a goal that cannot be easily measured and is further complicated by dynamics among diverse educational stakeholders. As a result, these seem to lead educational data scientists to engage in ongoing self-directed learning to meet the evolving demands of their roles that are upon request. Through this ongoing learning and adaptation, therefore, their professional identities as EDS are continuously shaped and reshaped by the dynamic contexts in which they work and face the challenges (Brown & Bimrose, 2018).

Riley: “It’s really important to have the background in the classroom and in teaching…this model is actually not useful because you can tell that the person who did this analysis has never been in a classroom…”
Riley
Higher Education: Administrator
Apply predictive modeling and statistical approaches to support students’ learning. Develop dashboard for data visualization and reporting.



Jamie: I found domain knowledge to be extremely useful… because half the battle, once you’ve met the technical threshold, then it’s all about domain knowledge. You want to get to the technical threshold, but then you want someone that's really going to know what they’re doing.
Jamie
Industry: Instructional Design
Use data to improve teaching and learning in educational institutions.



Blair: A lot of my job is taking data that the school generates and helping the students to better understand their progress and also helping the faculty to better understand how to assess students’ progress and better support them... It’s not even a very sophisticated analysis, but it's aggregating it together and presenting it to them in a way that they can take action on it.
Blair
Higher Education: Administrator
Use data to help students and faculty members understand and support learning progress.



Jamie mentioned: “educational data scientist is like a unicorn of five different roles all combined into one. So they're a data engineer, and their data analysts and their data scientists, and their learning scientist, and their researcher.”